Ten Years of Volunteering: What I've Learned About Service, Leadership and the Question of Privilege

DOES VOLUNTEERING = PRIVILEGE?

There's an opinion I saw about the privilege of volunteering.

In Volunteering Is a Privilege, by peppa punk, it says, "volunteerism becomes a stage of the privileged to compete to be seen as the most noble. While those who are already engaged in community care are excluded from the spotlight."

Peppa also says, "Before you read, you have to know that I acknowledge that these patterns are not universal. However, I think it is still important to talk about this."

I think this is a great place for me to join this conversation. First, there's a difference between a general social position or opinion, a position based on extensive lived experience and a position supported by data. This work draws from lived experience, a deeper dive into what the data says on volunteering, and it challenges the correlation and causation assumption that if you volunteer, you must be privileged.

TEN YEARS. MANY PLACES. MANY CAUSES.

For more than ten years, I've worked in a variety of volunteer positions. My experience doesn't prove what motivates millions of volunteers. But it does give me reason to question the broader claim about why people volunteer.

I've learned that volunteer work doesn't require martyrdom, sacrificial selflessness or some obscure and nebulous idea of pure motivations. There's way too much subjective judgment in deciding what someone else's motivation should be. I'm not interested in being sanctimonious. In any successful relationship, everyone should get value. If I can help a volunteer find value in an organization, or if I, as a volunteer, can find value in service - objective achieved, for everyone.

Reading my list of volunteer work, you might wonder how I fulfilled all these roles. In my experience, volunteering is a choice to commit. I made time for something that is important to me. In one scenario, I volunteered under a work program. In all the other ones, I've had my own consulting business, so I was able to shift work and volunteering around in my schedule. When you are a small business owner, you are used to working beyond a 9-5 schedule, as you often do.

Is that privilege?

Along the way, I also completed my graduate degree in Management and Leadership, so I'm looking at my roles through that lens as well.

PLACES AND CAUSES.

I've worked in elementary and high schools. I've worked in global AI ethics; I've weeded gardens and built a charitable arm for an organization supporting a Master Gardener program. I've supported entrepreneurs in emerging markets, and I've mentored start ups from around the World in a GovTech accelerator program. I worked on a nonprofit committee that supported small businesses during the Pandemic. I've supported county and state initiatives in support of women, and, with a federal agency supporting innovation and workforce development.

K-12.

I started my volunteer experience in kindergarten, literally.

I worked for a company that had a volunteer program that was open to everyone. For one hour per week, you could take paid time to contribute to any cause. At the time, my younger son was in kindergarten, and my older son was in second grade. Quite frankly, I welcomed the opportunity to keep an eye on them, to get to know their teachers and to see what was going on at the place where I sent my kids every day.

There's nothing noble about kindergarteners [laughs]. They are messy and funny, hungry sometimes, moody sometimes, smelly sometimes, and completely heartwarming. I learned a lesson there in human motivation that I remember to this day.

Structure matters when we all have to exist within an ecosystem. Some (a lot) of the work of a volunteer at an elementary school is supporting the teacher, watching a runner, blowing someone's nose, telling someone to sit down, be quiet (very nicely) and these things are all necessary. But structure, for kindergarteners, and for other human beings, can't be incessant. It can't be demanding. It can't be mean. And a certain amount of pure nonsense should be expected, and welcome. And sometimes, if the structure isn't working, a pause, a hug, room to ride out a meltdown (within reason), a snack, or just some simple patience is all it takes to get things back on track.

I came back into the K-12 ecosystem to support my grandson's business honors class. The class was working on a project where they started their own business. When I asked who the CEO was – they all raised their hands [laughs]. I'm not sure I ever convinced them that everyone can't be the CEO and that someone must do the work. When I asked everyone how much they wanted to make – I got shouts of $30K! $1,000,000! And everywhere in between. Their idea of wealth meant buying things, having things, power. When I showed them the tax tables for each of the shouted salaries – they were outraged! This was probably one of the funniest roles I've had.

I learned something there too. My role wasn't to correct those students, or to pontificate to them, from my superior vantage point. It was to translate what I knew into something usable and valuable for them. I hope I helped to create some leaders with a sustainable mindset.

Half-joking, but only half: every leader should have to do a semester (or more) in a kindergarten classroom. And then do a semester in high school.

POLICY. STATE. FEDERAL.

As my career started to grow, I transitioned more into equivalent volunteer roles. I volunteered at the Commission for Women in Miami Dade County. This was long before COVID, so everyone had to meet in person, in downtown Miami after working hours. Just the drive alone [heavy sigh]. I met some really great people there and we worked on several issues in support of women, including wage equity pledges from companies in our county.

I was also the co-chair for the Talent Management Workgroup at NIST. This was probably the most structured volunteer environment I've ever been in. But we managed to get leaders from industry, government and non-profits to agree on a document to help HR people hiring a cybersecurity workforce. This is where I got a sense of public private partnerships, policy, how the government works and how to speak the business languages of a very diverse group of stakeholders.

ENTREPRENEURIAL. START UP.

I've also worked in start up and mentoring ecosystems. These are some of my favorite opportunities. In the U.S, there are many resources that small businesses can leverage to help them achieve success. But in emerging markets, that is not the case. They have an idea, and they might even have a little money. But they face so many challenges. I love an entrepreneur, an innovator, and/or a startup. On paper, if you looked at them, only from a balance sheet perspective, so many of them likely wouldn't be successful. But part of being a successful entrepreneur is believing in your idea, in the face of all odds. I also mentor startups in a U.S. accelerator program. Some of the products and ideas they present are solutions to significant challenges, especially in climate change and the environment. I try to help them get connected to the communities where their solutions will have the most impact.

MASTER GARDENER. COMMUNITY.

Another one of my favorites was participating in the Master Gardener program from my local extension office. In these programs, you learn gardening best practices and part of the certification process is completing a certain amount of volunteer hours. I'm a champion weed puller! I spent many hours helping to maintain gardens at the historical society, working the extension office booth at the county fair, and I started an Urban Garden training series, helping gardeners with small back porches, apartments and in containers to establish and maintain gardens. I worked on a team that transformed the local extension office into a native plant greenspace. I also built and implemented the organization's charitable arm, setting up the website, the policy and the application process to support sustainable horticulture in our county. We also did a Christmas wreath project that was so much fun. This position gave me such a sense of community. I loved working outside and learning about local plants. This was onsite work, but our coordinator was super nice and very flexible about volunteer hours.

I also did virtual volunteering for one year at a native plant auction, contacting and tracking previous and new donors for pledges.

NON-PROFIT. AI ETHICS.

Most recently, I finished a five-year term on a Global ethics team in an AI domain. I did two years of Volunteer Management, onboarding and supporting new members, two years of writing the organizational blog, I built a Call for Expert series, featuring women from around the World sharing tips and insights into AI tools and careers, and I ended up writing an independent research paper on Autonomous AI and Language translation. It was a role I was exceptionally well suited for and where some of my best work lives. This was the longest continuous term I've ever had, so as it's ended, I thought it was a good time to look back on what I've learned.

SERVICE.

I'm okay with people coming to volunteer with an agenda. I'm grateful they came at all. They are being asked to contribute their time and work without pay. I think it's kind of disrespectful to demand that they have "pure" motives. Who am I to decide what that "pure" motive is? Seems kind of judgy. As a matter of fact, the more I understand what a volunteer's agenda is, the better I can put them to work, the more satisfied they will be with the work, the better the work will be, etc.

We are all so used to a work structure that the volunteer ecosystem just doesn't have. I can't discipline a volunteer (hopefully this doesn't come up). I have no job description to give them. It's kind of a bugger to terminate a volunteer – its likely there's no policy at all for volunteers. I also can't incentivize them in any way. I might be able to promote them – more work – also no pay – not much of a motivator. The only thing I can do is care about them.

I think at least one volunteer thinks I did that. From LinkedIn: "She has an incredible talent for volunteer management. She is very thoughtful in recruiting and onboarding volunteers, and she always creates an inclusive and supportive environment where people feel they belong. Beyond that, she always helps team members discover new opportunities to grow professionally, expand their networks, and showcase their unique skills. Her dedication makes her an invaluable leader in our community."

LEADERSHIP.

Part of my graduate degree was the study of different types of leadership. I feel most aligned with servant, or service leadership. The Greenleaf Center for Servant Leadership defines this style as, "a set of behaviors and practices that place the primary emphasis on the well-being of those being served."

My summary of this is – as a leader – it's not about me – it's about you (as the person who works for me, or who I lightly and loosely supervise).

I've seen too many leaders with a force leadership style. It's not a physical force, it's the force of threats. If you don't perform at a certain level – you are subject to discipline including termination. If you are late too many times, same. If you call in sick too many times, same. If you don't make a sales quota or fill enough orders, same. It's an or else mentality. I get that. We all have job descriptions and policies that we are subject to, that we are paid for, and that we agreed to when we took a position.

Good leaders make policies that work for the company, the community and the workforce. It's not that difficult.

In service and in leadership, people show up for completely different reasons, carrying completely different frameworks for what matters. Some of that can and should be structured — sit down, behave, here's the scope, here's the role. But the measure of success, whether it's five-year-olds, teenagers, founders, commissioners, gardeners, or global professionals, is in the outcome. Did we help the person we are there to help? Did the volunteer feel like they made a contribution? Did leadership value that contribution? That's what we should focus on. Not managing motive — managing outcome.

WHAT I'VE LEARNED.

There's a reality to working as a volunteer. If someone is a jerk at their job, it's likely they will be a jerk as a volunteer. Backstabbers, work stealers, ne'er do wells, people who always manage to spend an unusually long and consistent amount of time "somewhere else" when it's time to do the work, but are always at the front of the team picture [laughs]. I've seen more of them than I care to say.

And leadership in a structured volunteer organization is a thankless job. You probably have some kind of metric to achieve, but sometimes, very little support, and little to no money, in how you can achieve it. As for the jerks — sometimes they leave, sometimes they stay. There's lots of ways to serve, so if you are working for, or with a jerk, be noble and leave.

I agree with peppa punk on two things:

If you're an organization that needs volunteers, or a company thinking about starting a volunteer program for employees, make sure it's accessible to anyone and everyone who wants to participate. So many organizations — and people — need the work of volunteers to help as many people as possible. And treat the program, and the people in it with the respect they deserve. Set clear expectations, consider a stipend or other benefit program. Talk to your volunteers. They know more than you think.

If you are considering volunteer work, there are positions that pay stipends. There are many volunteer online resources that you can search for by paid/unpaid opportunities. It's no shame to want, or need, to be compensated for your knowledge and your work. There's often a message to volunteers that they should want to do this work without pay and it's somehow disgraceful to have any expectations in return (that's the jerk I talked about earlier). As a volunteer, you bring something to the table that has tremendous value. If the organization you are volunteering for doesn't make you feel that value – take that value somewhere else.

I would also add this suggestion to anyone considering a role in volunteering – set boundaries. What can you realistically do? And consider setting a time limit for how long you stay. Reevaluate your commitment to the cause, the organization and the people on a regular basis.

WHAT THE DATA SAYS, AND A REFLECTION OF LIVED EXPERIENCE.

According to the newest research from the U.S. Census and AmeriCorps, some 30% of Americans formally volunteer through organizations and nonprofits, and some 54% of Americans informally volunteer, exchanging services with neighbors, like lawn mowing, house sitting, running errands, babysitting, etc. The census is also tracking a new kind of volunteering – virtual volunteering. 1 in 5 formal volunteers contributed online.

Since I've talked about lived experience, I'll talk about the "who" I've seen in the volunteer community.

Mostly women. Of all colors and all ages. Women who are stay-at-home moms, work part-time, work full-time, and are retired. Here's the irony: we already know women experience wage losses throughout their careers, the motherhood penalty, ongoing pay disparity, and now, increasingly, the daughterhood penalty, the unequal responsibility of taking care of aging parents. It's the same population, showing up again in the volunteer world, doing work that rarely gets recognition and almost never gets paid. This doesn't seem like privilege, but more like continuity.

The data itself raises some additional questions about privilege — two of the groups with the largest relative gains in volunteer contributions are those with less than a high school education and people with family incomes of less than $25,000.

- Is the question of privilege only valid if the person volunteering is 'wealthy'?
- If it means "having discretionary time is a privilege," that's a different proposition—and income doesn't tell us whether someone has discretionary time.
- If it means "some people have greater access to prestigious volunteer opportunities," that's yet another proposition.
- If it means "any ability to give unpaid time to someone else is inherently evidence of privilege," then we've defined privilege so broadly that mowing a neighbor's lawn, watching someone's child, or bringing someone groceries, potentially becomes an act of privilege.

At this point, I'm not even sure what we mean when we say privilege.

And that's the problem with the volunteer = privilege premise. Before we decide there's correlation and causation, we probably need to define what we mean by privilege, figure out what we're actually measuring, and see if the data supports it.

SUMMARY.

I've been writing data driven articles that take deep dives into commonly held beliefs and assumptions, and in some cases, inflammatory positions on the Internet. Inflammatory positions get traction. And it's what too many people want to see, read and believe.

In my career, both paid and unpaid, you will often find me trying to get to the root of a problem. That mindset has taught me to be careful about simplifying things that are clearly complex, and in this case, reducing something as broad and human as service to a singular and negative motivation or explanation.

You can read more of my data driven work on Substack and on LinkedIn.

REFERENCES & FURTHER READING

Peppa Punk. "Volunteering Is a Privilege." Medium.
https://tranquils.medium.com/volunteering-is-a-privilege-16fd2fde82c2

Greenleaf Center for Servant Leadership. "What Is Servant Leadership?"
https://greenleaf.org/what-is-servant-leadership/

U.S. Census Bureau. "Civic Engagement and Volunteerism in the United States." 2024.
https://www.census.gov/library/stories/2024/11/civic-engagement-and-volunteerism.html

Institute for Women's Policy Research. "Motherhood Is Hard. Pay Penalties Make It Harder."
https://iwpr.org/articles/motherhood-is-hard-pay-penalties-make-it-harder/

Michelle A. Travis. "Combating Hidden Career Penalties Against Women Who Provide Eldercare." Forbes, January 28, 2025.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/michelletravis/2025/01/28/combating-hidden-career-penalties-against-women-who-provide-eldercare/

Women in AI. "2025 Women in AI Expert Series: Solving the Digital Divide with Artificial Intelligence." 2025.
https://www.womeninai.co/post/2025-women-in-ai-expert-series-solving-the-digital-divide-with-artificial-intelligence?utm_source=chatgpt.com

Women in AI. "2024: A Year of Impact and Innovation — The Global Women in AI Ethics Culture Office." 2024.
https://www.womeninai.co/post/2024-a-year-of-impact-and-innovation-the-global-women-in-ai-ethics-culture-office?utm_source=chatgpt.com

Research paper. DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.31793.75362.
https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.31793.75362?utm_source=chatgpt.com

DISCLOSURES.

Ethical AI
All content in this article was researched, written, and created by Karen Jensen. AI tools — Claude (Anthropic), Google Gemini, and OpenAI ChatGPT — were used only in a supporting capacity: as research assistants for source verification, as image collaborators with iterative prompting, and completed copyediting for flow, punctuation and proofreading. All editorial judgments, source selections, data interpretations, and conclusions are the author's own.

Data Conservation
Wherever possible, compressed images and adaptive streaming are used in all associated media. In many formats, a plain text version of this article is available for readers using assistive technology or low-bandwidth connections.

Conflicts of Interest
None. The author has no financial relationship with any organization, platform, or data source cited in this article. No AI company or technology vendor has sponsored, reviewed, or influenced this content.

